==========
2018-09-05
==========

Dr. Thomas Heyd (German)
Texts on CourseSpaces


Grasp of the problems 
Oppertunities to make something valuable
Sharpen our capacity to deal with arguments

Theory of Ethics

Overview
Look at cases
Go into the real world: The Coorperation (Film)
What characterizes a Professional occupation
Look at problems for Buisnesses
    Moral status of whistleblowing
    Globalization
    Bribery
    What is good leadership
Sexual Harassment
Property
Wealth
Marxist perspective on Work
Classmate's Presentations

Objectives
    Ethical theories
    How they are applicable

    Critical analysis

Read and Report on the texts


Grading
    Midterm Test
    Take Home Final
    Participation (Attendance sheet)
    Weekly Responses (Thinking about the texts)
    Group Work (Selection by Oct. 5, short report on Nov. 5)
Two Lowest Grades are dropped (Weekly assingments)




    
==========
2018-09-07
==========

Class activity no. 1
    1. Think about one morally/ethically charged problem that arises in the professions or in business?
        a) What exactly is wrong?
        b) Who is responsible?
        c) What would be the right in this situation?
        d) Why would this be the way?
        e) How might someone object to your analysis?
    2. Think about one way in which a professional or a business could make a positive contribution to out world
        a) What makes it positive?
        b) How would you respond to possible critiques of your views?

More questions to ask
    1. What is morality and what is ethics? Is there a difference?
    2. When we say that an action is right or wrong, what makes it right and wrong?
        a) Does it have something to do with the consequences?
        b) Does it have to do with the type of action that it is? (What we look at in this course)
        c) Whether we would all agree on the type of action?
        d) Whether is a type of action that shows (good, bad, coruageous, timid, etc...) character?
        e) Is it a matter of rights?
    3. When we dissagree about whether a certain action or state of the world is right or wrong, how would you explain such dissagreements?
    4. What is the relation between religion and ethics?
    5. What is the relation between law and ethics?
    6. Are morality and ethics a new thing, invented by modern people or is it likely that they are features of the culture of people from all times?

Relationships and ethics, and direction of reflections
    - Ethics concerns relationships that humans are engeged in
    - The professions as well as buisness activity genreate special relationships
    - Professions:
        * between professionals and clients
        * between professionals and society
        * among professionals
        * between professionals and their employers if they are employed at an institution or by a private





==========
2018-09-11
==========

Two orientations in this course
    - The basis idea in this course is to resolve problesm but also to engagge in the professions and ...


Intro Notes on arguments and Ethics

The long history of ethics: going against the grain
    - The past: modern human beings with our same physical and mental capacities have existed since at least 2000000 years
    - To flourish people developed deeply entrenched habits to collarborate, probably developed rules for living together (morally), and likely reflected on those rules (ethics)
    - Today: the ethnographic record of small groups (eg Amazonians and bushmen-san) confirms that people tend to
        a) cooperate with the forces of their environment
        b) engage in reciprocal collaboration with other human groups, as insurance against environmental calamities
    - Recent Past 11000 years ago the Ice Age ends
    - Beginning 8000 years ago, agriculture develops. People start to congregate in towns ans eventually in cities.
    - Despite the common supposition that in prehistory humans were 'savages' very fiew bones with intentional damage have been found prior to the development of agriculture
    - From 8000 years ago to now, however, plenty of evidence of violence in the record. What happened?
    - Bronze Age walled towns in North Spain
    - New opportunities and challenges: Metal-based agricultural tools and weapons arrive

The long history of ethics: 7th to 6th centuries BCE
    - The Upanishands: possible earliest written ethical reflection
    - Contain the earliest known declaration of Ahimsa (non-violence) as an ethical precept, propose the principles of temperance, self-restraint, truthfulness, charity, non-hypocricy, compassion
    - The writen record showing ethical reflection starts around 500 BCE (2500 years ago), featuring the writings of the Pythagoreands, Empedocles, and Socrates (Greece)...

Morality and Ethics
    - Often the terms 'morality' and 'ethics' are used interchangeably, but we can distinguish their specific meanings
        Morals comes from 'mores', customs and initially has to do with what is customarily seen as appropriate (right/wrong) ways of acting
        Ethics is reflective morality, and has to do with the standards for action resulting from reasoned critique and analysis of morality
    - THe ultimate aim of ethics: to help us live well and to resolve moral problems (possibly through principles and rules)
    - We can assume that all human groups, going far back in pre-history, have had some kind of morality. Why?
    - Because clear rules of right and wrong make life with others easier (they provide and adaptive advantage)
    ...

Some distinctions
    Descriptive vs prescriptive thories of ethics
        * How things are vs how they ought to be
    A common mistake: 'the is - ought fallacy'. To suppose that just because things are a certain way the ought to be so.
        * For instance, even if power often determines how our world is does not meant that power ought to decide: "might does not make right"
    Ethics and law
        * Some illegal acts may not be immoral, and some immoral acts may not be illegal
        * eg in 'apartheid' S. Africa, to marry a 'colored' person was illegal but was it immoral? To lie to and deceive a griend may be immoral but not illegal
    Ethics and Religion
        * Some religeons may call wrong some things that really are not ethicall wrong (religion in Rome required the worship of Ceasar; it was wrong not to do so.
        * Some things that tere is reason to thing of as unethical (eg sexist behavior, slavery, killing innocents) may be not be considered wrong by some religions at some time 
            (eg slavery up to the 19th century)

Diversity of approaches
    - No culture has a monopoly on morality - or ethics, especially not our own European - Western culture
        * in fact some cultures may well greater ethical sensitivity that European cultures
        * for example AMazonian peoples may have more attentive enviroments
        ....

First European philosophes on ethics
    - Socrates denounces the misguided 'education' of his time leading his fellow citizens into unnecessary wars
        * he personally models critical evaluation fo the morality of his time
    - Plato thinks up and writes the first 'utopia' a state in which neither money nore glory-seekers-- nor masculinist would rule
        * he proposes that the right and privilege to rule should go men or women who seek and love wisdom (those who practice philosophia) and not those who simply have 'a good spin'
    - Aristotle described how individuals in society may lead 'a good life'
        * he argues for character development *acquisition of virtues) through appropriate habits of thought feeling and action (virtue of ethics)




==========
2018-09-12
==========

First European philosophers on ethics
    - Philosophers from 600 bCS onwards: eg Empedocles, Pythagoras, made some points regarding morality
    - Socrates denounces the misguided 'education' of his times as leading his fellow citizens into unnecessary wars
        * he personally exemplifies gritical evaluation of the morality of his time
    - Plato thinks up and writes of the first 'utopia', a state in which neither money nor glory seekers nor masculinists would rule
        * he proposes that the right and privilege to rule should go men or women who seek and love wisdom (those who practice philosophia) and not those who simply have 'a good spin'
    - Aristotle described how individuals in society may lead 'a good life'
        * he argues for character development (acquisition of virtues) through appropriate habits of thought feeling and action (virtue of ethics)

Aristotelian Virtue Ethics
    - For Aristotle the good life for humans is achieving eudaimonia the flourishihg that humans are capable of ('happiness')
        * Aristotle's theory is not forcused on momentary happiness or pleasure
        * Eudaimonia is the achievement of living well, best seen in a complete life
    - But what is it to live well, for human beings?
        * It depends on the kind of being that we are: our 'function'
    - Foundation of Aristotleian ethics: the human 'function'
        * What is the 'function' of human beings?
    - That which we, as humans, have a unique potential to actualise, the activity humans are specially suited for
        * Aristotle dismisses nourishment, growth, as well as perception (why?)
        * Because plants and animals also exhibit those capacities (so?)
        * As human beings we have special capacity to apply reason (so?)
    - So what is it to live well as a human being?
        * If human beings are a kind of thing that has a function, we can ask whether that function comes in degrees
        * For example, some humans have special functions: musician, juggler, carpenter, and they each can 'realise' their function more or less well because of innate capacities + practice
        * So, does living well come in degrees? If yes, that we can speak ablut the characteristics that enable human beings to live well
    - A good X has the excellences or good characteristics of an X
        * A 'good' knife has the right balance, sharpness of blade, etc
        * Those characteristics ....

Virtue Ethics Continued
    - So to lead a good life, how should one act toward friends and family, towawrd competitors in buisness or the professions, toward one's community or one's country?
        * Virtue is to find 'the mean': to find and act on the appropriate or right measure between extremes for each situation
    - To be virtuous means to act well:
        * In danger, not to be rash nor fearful, but courageous
        * In friendship, not to be a spendthrift nor stingy but appropriately generous
        * In pleasures, not to be glutton nor ascetic, but apprieciative 
    - But there are no rules for finding the mean: it is a call of judgement
        * So a good life requires applying wise judgement throughout life 
        * Both the situation and our personal capacities are relevant (of course in many areas we can increase our capacities through training
        * Practice is the only way to get better at it, just as to be good physical shape requires training.
    - Aristotle's recommendation (instead of a strict principle);
        * Practice the virtues that lead to the best life

Virtue Ethics: Possible problems and possible solutions
    - What if a certain situations calls upon particular virtues that seem in conflict with each other?
    - For example: What if both the virtues of justice and of loyality, for example, seem called for (eg whistleblowing)?
        * What should Edward Snowden have done?
    - Perhaps Aristotle might say that this calls for the development of a further virtue or excellence. Which?
    - Perhaps: A virtue for (ie and excellence in) addressing conflicting judgements with alternatives, sensiblilty, kindness, justice at a conprehensive level. (the virtue of mediation?)
    - ...


Ancient schools of philosphical ethics after Aristotle
    - The schools of philosophy founded after Aristotle tried to describe how to live well despite of the often great difficulties of their times 
        (occupation, slavery, conscription...) and the fear about the after-life, due to religious teachings
    - The Skeptics: we cannot know anything with certainty, neither by way of reason nor by the senses. This skepticism will shield us regarding any dogmatic claims, moral, religious, or otherwise
    - The Epicureans: Our basic desire is to avoid suffering and seek pleasure, so living simply now will help us in times of hardship! (Suffering and pleasure also are ke foci of utilitarianism)
    - The Stoics: Human beings have a nature, and we are able to modify our feelings according to our understanding. SO if missfortune is seen as par of life then we can still live well
    - (For more, see Introduction to Ancient Philosphy, Ph 207)





==========
2018-09-14
==========

Summary of theories of ethics from the Modern period
    - Countering religious dogmatism in customary morality, three major, revolutionary, approaches stand out
    - Each is bassed on the assumption that ethics should be guided by reason (a capacity all humans have)
    - Social Contractarianism: right and wrong are based on a (fictitious) social contract. Made explicit by Hobbes in the 17th cent. and revisited in the 20th cent by John Rawls
    - Utilitarianism: right and wrong are based on the 'utility' for happiness of the consequences of actions for all those affected. 
        Introduced by Mentham and James Mill (18 cent) and developed by John Stuart Mill (19th cent)
    - The Kantian analysis: right and wrong are basse don whether actions respect fellow humans as capable of pursuing their own goals and life projects (as autonomous beings or persons)

Utilitarianism
    - The foundation: it is relevant to ethics what everyone desires. which is to gain happiness or pleasure and to avoid unhappiness, suffering and pain
        * John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) suggests, moreover, that if we are consistent, we won't privilege ourselves in ethics (Principle of Impartiality!) 
            and the more (and the higher quality) of a good thing the better
    - So the Principle of Utility says: Act so as to bring about the greatest happiness for the greatest number, taking into account that each individual counts for one and only for one
        * Interestingly this approach also implies that the sphere of those who count ethically is greater than the sphere of humanity. Why?
    - Because it includes all those beings that are sentient
    - It is a consequentialist approach: the kind of action is irrelevant, only the consequences count
        * So in some exeptional situations, in which no other course of action seems available, even stealing or lying may not be wrong in this view 
            -- but only if it brings about greater total happiness for the aggregate than all other options

Utilitarianism Applied
    - Missunderstanding: It is not simply a question whether an action brings about more pleasure or happiness than not doing it! (And possibly me!) Why not?
        * This would be a kind of consequentialist ethics but not utilitarian consequenctialist ethics
    - Rather, the utilitarian apporach
        a) is to do the action brings about the greatest amount of pleasure of ahppiness - in comparison to all other (reasonable)  options!
        b) for teh aggregate (the summation) of all those concerned. Relevant: depth in time and space. (How deep?...
    ....
    - Case 1: I have $20 that I want to domate to a worthy cause. I have several options
        a) Give it to a friend who wants to stange a party
        b) Give it to a group of birdwatchers who are collecting donations to finance a trip to S. America to view birds
        c) Give it to Doctor's without Borders to buy bandages and medicine
    - Case 2: On a certain road new Victoria there are many accidents on a narrow curve. The city of Victoria has decided to expropriate the property next toe thad to straighten the road. 
        This will desctroy a heritage house and will force a 79 y/o widdow to move away from her ancestral home.




==========
2018-09-18
==========

The Kantian Approach
    - Immanual Kant (1724-1804 CE), worked on epistemology, metaphysics, ethics, many sciences including metorology!
    - Konigsberg, East Prussia (Kaliningrad, Russia)
    - Great Conversationalist, dinner parties
    - Had students seel in hallways trying to get a seat in the over-full classroom in which he taught!
    - The Foundation: Humans value the realisation of their projects. That is: we value our 'autonomy' (capacity of self-direction)
    - Assumes that ordinary people already know what the right thing to do is.
        * Philosophy only helps us to make it clear -- so that we do not (convienently) make exceptions for ourselves
    - Ethics is constituted by what a person guided by reason would do
        * This we can discover on our own: we need to ask, is this an action that I consider ethically right -- without contradicting myself?
        * eg. can I choose to lie -- and really will to live with a world in which lying could be the ethical norm? Or would I simply (and convienently) be wanting to make an exception for myself?

Kantian-2
    - Kant's summary of the ultimate principle: The right thing to do is that, which any rational being can recognise as such 
        It should not intail a logical contradiction nor a contradiction with other reasonable principles
    - From this, Kant concludes that the right thing to do is that kind of act that any ratinal being could 'will' (activity endorse) to be done in the circumstances
    - It is ...
    ...

The Ultimate Principle of Morality
    - So the 1st version of the ultimate principle of morality is: act in such a way that the maxim by which you act could become a universal law
        * Maxums are the underlying principle of actions, that which is guides the action
    - In other words, the 1st version says: act so that you would be willing to endorse that the underlying principle of you action become the principle by which any and all people act
    - Ex1, should I make a lying promise to return something about which I already know that I will not be able to do?
    - Ex2, Should I help someone in need?

Kantian-3
    Three possible types of actions
        1. Sometimes we consider acting in a way that is not in agreement with the ultimate principle (it could not become the universal rule of action). These acts are not permissible
        2. SOmetimes though, we acti because of the ultimate principle, those actions are ethically praiseworthy
        3. Sometimes we act in our own best interests, 
            but if it is in agreement with the ultimate principle (the action does not contradict it) but is not because of the ultimate prinviple then tose actions are permissible 
            (not ethically wrong even if not praiseworthy)
    So
        1. Some actions are clearly wring: to act in such a way that another could not, in principle, consent to. To injure, to defraud, to lie, to manipulate someone...
        2. Some actions clearly are right: to support others in their goals. To gie help to those in need, to return an item that someone lost
        3. Mainly actions are neither wrong, nor praiseworthy: to do what one pleases while respecting others. Ex... painting a landscape picture, walking in the park, minding one's own buisness

Explaining the Principle
    More on the foundation:
        - What is special about human beings is that, as rational beings, we do care about our ability to carry on our projects, to make our own decisions about how to act... we care about our autonomy!
    So the 2nd version of the ultimate principle of morality is this: act in such a way that you always treat humanity as an end and never as a mere means
    Isn't it often necessary to treat others as a means/ Yess, and it's ok
        - The principle says that it is wrong to use others as a mere means: using them in ways that they could not in principle consent to (eg to defraud them)
    - Treating others as ends: suporting them in their attempt to fufill their own ends ...
        ....

Application
    - Ex1, should I make a lying promise to return something which I already know that I will not be able to do?
        Would this be treating another as a mere means or as and end?
    - Ex2, Should I not help someone in need?
        ...





==========
2018-09-19
==========

Social Contractarianism: Old and New
    - The Foundation: Agreement is society is the vasis for moral right/wrong
    - Hobbes: Right and wrong is what members of society do agree upon is right and wrong 
            (probably including being against killing innocent children, but also possibly accepting gender discrimination or racism, for ex)
    - Rawls: right and wrong is what each one of us, as members of society, would agree upon if we had to decide 'from behind a veil of ignorance' 
            that impeded us from knowing which place in society each one of us, individually, do occupy.
        * So for example, could gender discrimination or payin ga misery of a wage to someone be right? Well, how ould we think about it if looked at it from behind the veil of ignorance?
    - If we realise that we ourselves might be among the discriminated agains, or those who are paid less than is fair, we will likely not thing that either is fair or right
    - Rawls thinks that we would at least agree to two basic principles:
        1. Each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with a similar liberty for others
        2. Social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both
            a) reasonably expected to be to everyone's advantage 
            b) attached to positions and offices open to all.
    - Some implications discussed by Rawls:
        * Liberty cannot be traded off for some others benefit: health or other freedom of movement cannot be exchanged for some other benefit to individuals or society 
            -- even if they would increase utility
        * Some inequaities may be acceptable but must be endorsable by all
    
Feminist Ethics
    - The key observation underlying feminist ethics is that women in our societies tend to be subordinate to me, discriminated on the basis of their gender, 
        and that their point of view is either depreciated or not seen as relevant because they are women.
    - Feminist ethics argues that all forms of oppression of women are ethically wrong
    - So: Right action is that which corrects oppression against women, in all circumstance where it occurs
    - Some feminists understand feminist ethics as arising from a commitment to oppose all sorts of oppression, not just of women
    - Consequently they also oppose racism, ageism, discrimination of disabled people, and oppression of nature
    - A key reference point are Karen Warren's arguments for ecofeminism

From Feminist Ethics to Care Ethics
    - A further observation made by some feminists is that women have a specific perspective on life due to their biological and cultural roles
    - The exact nature of this perspective (genetic? cultural?) is debated when it appears to "essentialise" women's biological and cultural circumstances
    - The specific persoective of women has been understood to lead to an ethic of care, which arises from a perception of responsibility regarding those with whom we are in relationships
    - Insofar as this ethics is grounded in personal experience is often contrasted with Kantian and Utilitarina ethics
    - Other rather see it as complementary though.

Care Ethics
    - A key question to ask about ethics: why should I take responsibility? The answer of care ethics is: because I am "in-relationship" with a number of beings
    - The principle of care ethics: "caring for others and fostering good relationships"
    - Foundation: caring for others and fostering good relationships come 'naturally'
        1. beause of our sociality
        2. because of our reciprocal need for each other
    - What is care?
        ....
    - Key Features:
        - Moral attention: attending to the complexity of situations
        - Sympathetic understanding: attending to the best interests of others in need
        - RElationship awareness: taking not that we are all in relationships with others
        - Accommodation and harmony: acting to preserve harmony in relationships by seeking to accommondate others
    - Though originally thought of as characteristic of women and girls, Manning does not see care ethics as limited to one gender
    - A source for the initial development of the theory of care ethics was the supposed contrast between the care and the justice voice
        - The psycologist Lawrence Kohlberg had proposed a theory of stages of moral development
        - Starting from ego-centredness of small children, we develop until reaching the highest stage, at which....

Care Ethics - 2
    - The feminist psychologist Carol Gilligan claims that Kohlberg privileges principles in an abstract moral vacuum, ilustrated by the "Hienz Delema": girls and boys solve it differently
        - The reaction of a) boys in contrast to b) girls highlight different conceptions of agency: 
            a) isolated, following abstract rules, impartiality 
                vs
            b) recognition of our embeddedness in situations, attending to others without rules, with sympathetic understanding and identification
        - Separate vs connected self (Lyons): contrast between a) conflict between abstract...
        ...






==========
2018-09-21
==========

harriswatt@gmail.com

the Corporation - a film by Mark Achbar, Jennifer Abbott & Joel Bakan
    Corperations as People
    Only care about stockholders, not stakeholders
    Corperations are not like us
        only about making money
    Only concerned about profits
    Have a legal obligation to focus on profits
    Externality (term)
        Using common resources to make money, you have to take the cost of doing buisness and sell the product for more to make a profit

Iceland before the Great Recession





==========
2018-09-25
==========

Buisness and Corporations
    1. What is business? How would you most accurately describe it?
        An enterprise for profit
    2. What makes 'being in business' different from other occupations?
    3. What types of business are there? Four types are prevalent.
        Corporation
        Partnerships
        Sole-provider

What is a business?
    A business: and arrangement of space and time, energy, resources, and people, dedicated to the production or exchange of goods or services, usually for sale and profit
    What types of business are there?
        1. Sole Proprietorships: Owned by one person who retains all of the legal rights and bears all of the responsibilities associated with the business. 
                                 Legally the business is not considered a separate entity from the owner
        2. Partnerships: 2 or more people who agree to pool their finatcial, managerial, and technical resources in order to do a certain activity for profit
        3. Corporation: Legally it is a separate entity that has an independent existence from its owners
            - it can buy, own, and sell property, sue and be sued, and must file its own income tax return
            - Tends to focus on profit, even if other goals are possible
            - Earnings are disbursed based on level of investment
        4. Cooperatives: Legally also a separate entity, usually incorporated
            - Organized, owned, and democratically controlled by the people who produce or use their products and services
            - Earnings are distributed on the basis of participation in the cooerative rather than level of investment
            - The roles of owner and producer or user are closely connected
            - Diverse types: industrial, bankings, farming, housing, shopping, kindergarten, news media, farming, travel agency, etc
    Both corporations and coops
        - profit may be on of their objectives, but not necessarily or exclusively 
        - Either can be are part of the 'social economy'...

Corporations
    1. What makes anything, including humans, 'a person'
    2. What kind of entity are corporations? Are they 'persons' in the same sens as humans --or-- are they persons merely as legal-fictions?
    3. Is the relationship between shareholders and the corporation like that between any owner and her or his property? Are there differences due to the legal independence of corporatins??
    4. Besides the legal-fiduciary responsibilities towards shareholders, corporations may be seen also to have other, ethically relevant responsibilities. On what grounds?
    5. If corporations do have ethically relevant responsibilities. what types of responsibilities specifically do they include?
    6. If corporations were persons, then who is responsible for the effects of their activities (both positive and negative)
    7. If corporations were not persons, then who is responsible for the effects of their activities (both positive and negative)?





==========
2018-09-26
==========

Personhood
    What is a person?
    Kantian concept
        - Person has a perspective
        - Agency: persons have goals and act on them based on their beliefs and values
        - Autonomy? Persons strive to be self-directed
    So persons seem to be independent agents who make choices based on goals and objectives and beliefs and values
    Ethical repercussions: to treat persons 'as persons' 
        - Consideration of their interestes as having a perspective, agency, autonomy
        - Expectation of reciprocity, such that persons constitute a moral community
        - Taking (ethical) responsibility for one's actions
    
The Coporation: what kind of thing is it?
    It is defined by its legal status and the ownership of assets
        - Corporations are considered to be 'artificial persons in law': while notionally 'owned' by shareholders, corporations exist independently of them
        - Managers and directors have a legal 'fiduciary' repsonsibility to protect the investment of shareholders. (What does the term 'fiduciary' stand for here?)
    Essential point: corporations exist and have the legal rights of persons because human societies have agreed that they be allowed to exist among us and have those rights
        - The reason they exist in the USA is that country's political leaders thought it important to create a legal framework for the development of the railroads for the conquest of the West
        - The inversotrs were granted the privilege of protecton from liability as individuals because those governing were able to argue that this would be adbantaguous to US american society
    What responsibility do they have?

Spiderman and Responsibility
    Is Spider-man right? Why?
    And how does his 'principle' apply to corporations?

Diversity of corporate responsibilities
    Some possible corporate responsibilities
        1. Social responsibilities toward the community and society
        2. Towards their employees
        3. Towards their suppliers
        4. Towards their customers
        5. Environmental 
        6. To future generations
        7. Past generations (respecting their requests)
        8. Non human sentient beings
    Diverse areas of the world, i.e. Northern Europe, Africa, USA, Asia, have developed a diversity of de facto approaches to the responsibilities of firms

Diversity of de facto approaches toward corporate responsibilities
    In Norther Europe
        - Umbrella formal agreements were concluded between labour unions and management associations early in the 20th century
            - These agreements guaranteed participation in decision making for workers/employees, in setting conditions for firing and hiring, and in a share of the profits(!)
            - Workers' representatives obtained seats on the board of directors in many Northern European countries (Germany, Sweden)
        - What might be some consequence of these ...
        ...
    In many Asian and African countries
        - companies may be expected to contribute to local communities, either by hiring locally or making significan contrabutions to building projects, education, etc
    In the USA
        - Corporations might 'sponser' community sports events and such (in exchange for free advertising)
            - But it is assumed that the ...
        ....
    ...

Moral Responsibility of corporations
    Human persons are held morally responsible because
        - They seem to be independent agents who make choices based on goals and objectives and beliefs and values
    But can a corporation be morally responsible for its actions?
        - Can corporations really act independently, based on beliefs and values, or is this merely a convenient fiction?
        - Are corporations rather mere instruments of their owners -- just like machines in industry?

Issues re the moral responsibility of corporations
    Arguments in favour of the view that corporations may be persons and be held morally responsible as persons:
        1. THey have an internal decision structure that directs decisions in line with set goals (French 1979) -- similarly to people with minds
        2. Mission statements manifest a set of beliefs and values that states what is generally regarded as right or wrong for the corporation, creating an 'organizational culture' (Moore 1999)
        3. While ownership may shift, corporations can act based on beliefs, values, and objectives
        4. So by the fact that corporations act based on having an internal decision structure and beliefs and values they should be held equally responsible for their actions as human persons
    Are an internal decision structure + mission statement really sufficient to make something into a person who can act?

Questions re the moral responsibility of corporations
    Are an internal decision structure + mission statement really sufficient to make something into a person who can act?
    1. SInce corporations may exist om paper only, and they cannot suffer as a human being can,, sho the lack of a 'body' be an issue?
    2. Even if corporations were considered persons and held morally fully responsible, should the humands involved also be held morally responsible?
    3. If humans should be held responsible, then which?
        - even if any one of the parties does not seem to be fully involved?

More issues re the morally responsibility of corporations
    Joel Makan (2004): if the corporation is a person then it in fact is kind of unfeeling psychopath, unable to act except in selfish ways, because of the priority of the profit motive 
    Book: Bakan, J. 2004. The Corporation, The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and Power. New York: Free Press 
    Is Bakan right? Is it impossible for corporations to be good 'corporate citizens'?
        - Must corporations necessarily and exclusively be self interested? Why/Why not?
        - What can/should be done to hel them become good 'corporate citizens'?
    Does good corporate citizenship depend on 
        a) its mission statement or -- instead -- of its implicit corporate culture
        b) its formally expressed beliefs and values? or -- instead -- on its tact informally held beliefs and values?
        c) or rather, on the expressed beliefs and values of shareholders (at annual meetings) or of directors of the board?
    If it is a matter of implicit corporate ...





==========
2018-09-28
==========

Managerial Capitalism and stockholders
    In the early part of the 20th century, in North America the accepted way of doing buisness was "managerial capitalism" 
        - Accordingly, corporations have all the legal privileges of human persons, such as being able to sue for damages
        - But corporations were supposed to have no responsibilities, except to a limited set of individuals: shareholders or stockholders
        - The basis for this model was a very narrow understanding of the legally binding 'fiduciary' responsibility to stockholders as norminal owners of the corporations
    It may be argued that stock/shareholders are 'at arms length' from corporations, because corporations largely act independently ...
        ...
    ...

Milton Friedman as spokesperson for managerial capitalism
    Writing in a popular magazine, Milton Friedman (1970) assumes that corporations have no social responsibilities
    His claims:
        1. Only humans have moral responsibilities for their actions 
        2. It is managers' responsibilities soley is to act in the interests of the shareholders
        3. Social issues and problems are the proper buisness of the state rather than of corporate managers
    We may challenge each of his views
        1. Why should only humans have moral responsibilitie? Critique?
        2. Why believe that managers should exclusively act in the interest of shareholders? Critique?
        3. Why should the responsibility for social issues and problems be the responsibility of the state?

Managerial capitalism and ethics
    According the the model of managerial capitalism corporations have very few ethical responsibilities, if any
        - Corporations appear to operate in a 'moral vacuum' -- even where ...
    ...

Edward Freeman's stakeholder capitalism -- 1
    Theory developed by Edward Freeman (1984 and 1994 papers)
        - While managerial capitalism supposes that corporations have an exclusive fiduciary duty to stockholders/shareholders...
        - Stakeholders capitalism holds: corporations also have (possibly fiduciary) responsibilities to other stakeholders (1994 p.70)
    Stakeholders of an organization are any groups that have stake in or claim of the firm (1994 p.70)
        - ...any group or individual who can affect, or is affected by, the achievement of the organization...
        ...
    ...

Stakeholder capitalism -- 2
    Why?
    The is a reflection of the fact
        - That corporations constitute a part of our society
        - That they depend on corporation from others
        - That they affect the lives and interests of others
    So a stakeholder of a corporation is an individual or group that
        - May be harmed by or benefit from the corporation
        - or whose rights are at risk of being violated...
    ...

Stakeholder capitalism -- 3
    Corporations are not natural beings
        - they are deliberate creations of society, benefiting shareholders, tolerated in expectation that they will be useful to society's diverse members
    In this context, business ethics Crane and Matten make the following critical comment regarding managerial capitalist apporaches:
        - "it is not evident why the higly speculative and mostly short-term ...
    ...

Stakeholder capitalism -- 4
    Stakeholders are key because they affect or may be affected by the corporation
        - But each stakeholder also has its own stakeholders
    So, an action at one end of a network may filter all the way through to many...
    ....

Stakeholder capitalism -- 5
    What could motivate corporations to act more according to the stakeholder capitalist and less according to the managerial capitalist model?
    Possibly
        - Awareness of the CEO, managers and employees of inter-dependencies of the corporation with its stakeholders
        - Clear direction from the shareholders
        - Expectations and encouragement
        ...




==========
2018-10-02
==========

The Professions and Ethics

Professional has a responsibility towards a client
There is a trust in the professional

Divinity
    Advocates to you

Military
    Protects you

Big deal vs not a big deal

Professions vs other Occupations
    Necessary features according to Bayles:
        - Extensive training
        - Intellectual omponent in training
        - Important service to society
    Common Features according to Bayles:
        - Certification (not all)
        - Organization of members
            a)to fulfill service expectations
            b) to secure economic benefits
        - Relative autonomy in the exercise of their function (some work for themselves, others with an orginization)





==========
2018-10-03
==========

Midtern
    2 short
    1 long - 40%

Professions vs other Occupations
    So, what makes the baker or the beekeeper occupations different from tose of the baking engineer or the apicultural scientist
    If we say that they are not yet professionals, could bee keepers or bakers ever become professionalized? How?
        Nurses and journalist mostly have professionlalized. Wha did they do? How is there occupation differnt now?
    According to Bayles the questions to ask are:
        Does becoming a baker or a bee keeper require 
            a) extensive training
            b) an intellectual component
            c) provide an important service to society?

Professions
    Sometimes we call someone 'a true professional' even if their occupation is not recognised as a profession (waiters, athletes...)
        - So what do we mean when we say this then?
        - Is it a metaphor or do we literally mean that the person is a professional?
    What is the situation regarding 'professional athletes?'
        - Are they literally professionals - in the strict sense?
        - If not, what are we saying by calling the that way?
    Types of professionals according to Bayles:
        - Consulting professionals: mostly work for individuals 
        - Scholary professionals:...

Scholarly vs consulting professionals
    Consulting professions face different ethical, economic questions that scholarly professions:
        1. Consulting are deemed to provide an important direct service to society
        2. A monopoly is generally granted by the state, but the licensing is done by schools and license-granting professional associations
        3. Despite the nomopolistic situation, the consulting professions are not subject to a lot of public control
    Questions
        1. Id what sense do consulting professionals really serce society directly? Is the really a significant distinguishing factor from scholarly? Don't both serve society in some ways?
        2. Is a monopoly for professionals justified? When and why? In the case of lawyers? In the case of devines/priests?
        3. Why is there so little public control of the consulting professions? Why might public control be important? Who should be allowed to grant licenses? The state? The school of professionals

Consulting Professions
    Some work for corporationsand recieve a salary
    In some cases it may be unclear who their clients are, eg company doctors
        - is the client the corporation that pays them, or their patients?
    Note the potential conflict of responsibilities


Hughes: A sociological perspective
    What does Hughes add to Bayles' account?
    Hughes proposes that the professions and professionals
        1. Provide 'esoteric' services
        2. 'Profess' to know better
        3. Claim an exclusive right to practice
        4. Ask to be trusted
        5. Are dependent on close solidarity among members
    Questions (compare with other occupations)
        1. What makes professional services 'esoteric?'
        2. What positive value does 'professing to know better' add to an occupation, if any?
        3. Why should professionals be granted an exclusibe right to practice?
        4. Why should they expect to be truested?
        5. Why is solidarity among member important? And, how can this solidarity end up harming the public in certain cases?

Professions vs other occupations
    5. Hightend sense of responsibility
    


The Professional-Client Relationship
    Characteristics of this relationship, at least in the 'consulting' professions
        - A significant difference in knowledge and training between professional and client
        - Professional is employed by the client
        - What else?
    What issues may arise in this relationship?
    Key issue concerns who is to decide on what
        - How is the autonomy of the professional to be brought into harmony with the autonomy, concernts, and values of the client?
    Bayles' five models of professional-clent relationships:
        - depending on circumstances they may be more or less...

Modesl of the client-professional relationship
    5 possibilities explored
        1. Client takes on most authority and responsibility, as if the professional were a mere instrument for the client's wishes (agency model). Problems?
        2. Professional and client act as if they were equals, based on shared understanding of thet issues in question (contract model). Problems?
        3. Professional and client asc as if they were equals and is as if they could rely on and trust each other, based on shared feelings (friendship model). Problems?
        4. Professional takes on most authority and responsibility as if the client were an infant requireing the equivilent to a parent to make decisions regarding their interest (paternalism model
        5. Professional and client share authority and responsibility as if the client could trust the professionla regarding the issues in question (Fiduciary model) Problems?

Summary of Bayles' points regarding the 5 models
    Agency: the professional is a 'hired gun' who acts in the client's stead. Critique?
        Critique: it de-personalizes the professional 
            - The autonomy is superior knowledge of the professional are undervalued
            - Abducation of responsibility by the professional is supposed, 
                when in fact professionals can choose the accept or reject clients and they don't see themselves a mere agents of client's wishes
        Are there cases in which this approaches may be legitimate?




==========
2018-10-05
==========

Summary of Bayles' points regarding the 5 models
    Agency: the professional is a 'hired gun' who acts in the client's stead. Critique?
        Critique: it de-personalizes the professional 
            - The autonomy is superior knowledge of the professional are undervalued
            - Abducation of responsibility by the professional is supposed, 
                when in fact professionals can choose the accept or reject clients and they don't see themselves a mere agents of client's wishes
        Are there cases in which this approaches may be legitimate?

    Contract: professional and client act as if they could come to well-grounded understanding about the details of what to do (as in a contract) based on shared understanding. Critique?
        Critique: a false sense of equality is assumed
            - The client really has less knowledge and training than the professional and this is not recognized in the relationship
            - The contract model encourages minimalism (Do no more than what contracted for) as well as maximalism (eg the professional physicial asks for extra tests to protect himself)
        Only in exceptional circumstances the shared knowledge base will be so equal that a 'contract' model may be apporpriate. Example?

    Friendship: the client relates to the professional as if they are buddies. Critique?
        Critique: a false sense of 'chumminess' is assumed
            - In fact the interests of the professional and the client do diverge, this is not recognised in the relationship
            - for example, the professional may want to quickly 'get the job done' while the client expects them to take their time, like friends would)
        There may be exceptional circumstance in which this model may be apporpriate. Examples?

    Paternalism: the professional acts as if the client were a child. Problems?
        Critique: it depersonalises the client
        It is mistakenly assumed to be appropriate do to 
            a) the superior knowledge of the professional
            b) assumption that the clients cannot give fully free and informed consent
            c) the supposition that the client later would give their agreement
        But superior technical knowledge in their dicipline does not mean superior knowledge regarding the value choices of a particular individual
            - outcomes are not a good
            - The excuse of 'client incapacity' does not often or regularly arise
            - When, exceptionally, the client is incapable to give consent the appropriate solution is to find a legal gardian who can legitmately decide what is to be done for the client
        Paternalism is only appropriate if both 'client incapacity' and 'extreme urgancy' occur.

    Fiduciary: professional and client act as if the client could trust in the professional. Bayles proposes that, for most cases, this model does provide the right balance. Why?
        - The professional is not de-personalized, as in the agency model
        - The superior knoweldge of the professional is recognised, unlike in the contract and friendship models
        - Client is not de-personalized as in the paternalistic mode. Their authority and concerns are recognised
        Critique:
            - if the profession is not capable of -- or not willing to -- act in the interests of the client then the fiduciary model is inappropriate
            - Trust has to be earned, and it can be lost if initially present
        So, consulting professionals need to be 'trust-worthy' accoring to this model

The Professional-Client Relationship -- 4
    What does it mean that the relationship is based trust?
        - It has built on the recognition of relevant differences since the client has to rely on the professional's knowledge and expertise
        - The professional should base decisions on the values and interests of the client
    1. One implication is that the professional minimally needs to obtain voluntary informed consent regarding all decisions that may significantly impact the client -- as seen from the client's perspective
    2. Furthermore, the professional really should be working out the problem...


Case: Police and Paternalism





==========
2018-10-09
==========

Whistleblowing: Taking responsibility -- when no one else does!

Questions to ask about whistleblowing
    1. What is it, exactly? Definition? What is it 'to blow the whistle' in an organisation?
    2. Might it be ethically required? Can it be eithically wrong?
    3. Why may it be important for an organization?
    4. How does it interact with other responsibilities and duties? ex
        a) clinets
        b) colleagues
        c) society at large
        d) self
    5. ...
    ...

The Duty of Loyalty
    1. Commitment, can be put on someone
    2. Acting some way that supports another party
    3. Commitment to being faithful/supportive, based on the benefits recieved by the person

The Duty of Loyalty
    Certain engagements create duties
        - Parents
        - Promises
    Loyalty
        the firsm obligation
    Usually the results of reciprocal commitments
        assumed to lead reciprocal obligations
    Do the obligations have any limitations?
        The obligations compete with each other
        we have to figure out the weight of the obligations and manage them together
        Plato says it's wrong to return a sword to a man who wants to kill
    The duty of loyalty with whistleblowing
        can whistleblowing be a duty
        if so can it be wrong to insist on the duty of whistelblowing? When?
        Can it be wrong to insist on the duty of loyalty? When?

De George and the duty of loyalty
    Claims that whistleblowing is disloyal to the firm
        for it to be permissible, the good has to outweigh the harm
    Conditions where its permissible
        1. causes significant harm to the public
        2. The employee reports the threat to the public present in the product or policy th their empolyer and still no action is taken
        3. when exausted all internal procedures and possibilities
    Why these conditions?
    Given two additional conditions, it is ethically obligatory
        4. documented evidence that shows a serious danger to the public
        5. reason to believe that going public is necessary to obtain the changes
    Why. What do we think of his proposal?

Whistleblowing: Naming and Definition
    Naming: Naming may reveal bias
        those who want to keep things hush-hush speak of 'tittle-tattle'
        ...
    ...
    Form of taking responsiblility when no one else does

A practical problem and ethical dimensions
    Conflicts of interests involving
        a) the public
        b) the organisation
        c) ...
    ...

Ethical dimensions
    Consequences: harm; likelihood of succeeding in preventing harm by blowing the whistle?
    Foci
        Harm
        ...
    ...





==========
2018-10-10
==========

Manager-Client Relationship
    Manager: people who are hired to manage something in an organization
    Key Idea: Think about the relationship between the managers and the client (Managerial capitalisim, stakeholders)
    Managerial Capitalism: Simply manage in such a way to achieve a goal for the owners of a company (Consider factors ex illegal, fines, bad name)
    There is bad and good management
    Stakeholders: there is a duty to the owners, but should be organzed as a whole to take care of all the stakeholders (supplier of goods, people nearby, etc...)
    If the manager was a professional, then you have a different kind of layer
        As a professional you are somebody who has deep understanding of how what you do has reprocussions
        If you see yourself as a professional, you see yourself providing a service to those concerned
        They hire somebody (professional) that is going to help their company organize themselves to realize all of the owner's goals, and transform the company

Aristotle
    Doesn't give set rules
    What's it all about: Living a good life
    And we can develop good habits around this so in the moment you can make the right decision

The Case
    half a page
    Will be sent tomorrow

Rawls
    disregard socio-economic status
        People should have the same ethical treatments
    Against slavery




Means to an end - Line 315





==========
2018-10-16
==========

Loyalty is to stand up for some party/individual/group/entity despite some changing circumstances

Expectation of reciprosity

Duska: Questions
    1. Corporations can't reciprocate because of their for profit nature
    2.
    3. French says that they are people so we can hold them accountable, but Duska thinks its not sufficient

Duska
    Wonders wheter company loyalty makes sens
    In the case of whistleblowing certian obligations clash
    Duska doesn't think corporations are things you can have loyalty to
    Thinks they are not persons
        CID structure does not change that
        They are more like instruments
    They are incapable of taking responsibilities like humans can
    Something in their structure that means that they can't take responsibility
        because they are forced to maximize their profits in spite of their employees
    Loyalty implies reciprocal trust and confidence
        This meand going beyond self interest
    Corporations are mostly profit oriented
        cannot feel obligations
        recognises no reciprical obligations
    But why do some people suppose that employees owe loyalty to corporations in the first place?
        based on the fiction of them being a team
    Why is this a fiction?
        Business is no game

Duska V: Questions and Objections
    1. 
    2. 
    3.
    4.
    5. 

Larmer
    "Standard view" on whistleblowing
        Employees do have "prima facie duties of loyalty and confidentiality to their employees, so whistleblowing cannot be justified except on the basis of a higher duty to the public good"
    Disagrees with Duska
    Whistleblowing can be permissible if the breach of loyalty can be justified
    Similar to De George
    Claims that loyalty need not be as reciprocal
        Ex. parent to teenager
    Proposes that even if the primary motivator is profit, it should not be disqualified
        They are capable doing something for employees
    Even if we supposed that loyalty to a company were not appropriate, an employee may still owe loyalty






==========
2018-10-17
==========

Lamer
    Just because the primary motive is profits, doesn't mean that the employer doesn't care about the employees

Lamer 4
    1. hard to generalize. 
    2. 
    3. The relationship between two employees is different than the employee-company
    4. 
    5. 
    6. 
    7. 
    8. 
    9. 
    10. 

Lamer 5
    In your loyalty, you might have to blow the whistle because you are doing them good

Lamer 6
    Whistleblowing may be a way to act with loyalty
        To clean out the self destruction
        It might not be safe for the individual to report internally, so whistleblowing may be the only option
        Loyalty requires concern for the other beyond justice





==========
2018-10-19
==========


==========
2018-10-23
==========

Ethicla Leadership

Parklands School Shooting

Vista Outdoors
    Makes guns and ammo, as well as outdoor equipment

Who is the moral agent, the CEO or the customers?

Where is Vista in the conversation?

Primary Variables in Leadership Research
    Characteristics of the Leader
    Outcomes of the leadership (Utilitarian-esque)
    Behaviours and motivations
    Behaviours and motivations of the people being led
    Influence Mechinisims
        Charisma, Expertiese leadership
Leadership and followership are mirrors (in this guys opinion)    

A working definition
    How one ought to lead and what action one ought to take in the conduct leadership
        Fiduciary responsibility to shareholders vs well being of workers
        Short term market capitalization vs long term viability

Impact of Leadership
    Huge
    We live inside of these influencing relationships
    There is power inside of leadership
    How is the power going to be used

The Worry
    Assumption that if you are a leader, you are good/ethical
        Arguement: not necessary the case
    The dark side of leadership
    There is a possibility to enable others to act badly
        Normalizes bad behaviour

The Bad
    Valient - markup of orphan drugs
    SNC Lavalin

The Good

B Corp - Evaluating businesses based on criteria

Traditional Values
    There is a person that is a leader who is the moral agent
        The follower becomes a passive agent - acting on the will of the leader

Contemproary Views
    Leadership is more distributed
        The followers are also agents who can act inside of the relationship
    Collective model

Some Theories of Ethical Leadership
    Transformative leadership: Helping people become different
    Servant Leadership: in the service of others 
    Authentic Leadership: Finding a true and honest relationship

In business and organizational life, leadership is used for control
    Used to get more out of their workers

Where are we today?
    Vague sense of what leadership is, but we don't have a handle on it
    We fall in love in these models of leadership
    But there is a darker side
        Leadership seems to make people narcisists

What is the Nature of Leadership?
    Person (in the position of power)
    Power (Who/how influence)
    Process (how you go through the actions of leadership)
    Product
    Position
Tend to care about power and position

Consequences of Ethical Leadership
    There doesn't seem to be a corelation bewteen ethical businesses and success




==========
2018-10-24
==========

Leaders can become something by their followers
Different degrees of reasons for leadership
How do you manage the leadership
Who is actually taking action in this relationship

Leadership

Discussion on leadership
    What Ciulla would say
        Sometimes effective actions aren't ethical, but what should be the priority?

Pilgrimage site: Muktinat, Nepal
    
Questions about the Sadhu
    1. 
    2.
    3. 




==========
2018-10-26
==========

Globalisation and Values in Tension

What is Globalisation
    Is Globalization a new thing? Does it pose ethical problems?
    Who is it good for?

    According to Scholte (2005) globalization is not 'Internationization" or liberation or universalization or westernization
    Globalization: a process which dimishes the necessity of a common and shared teritorial basis for social, economic, and political activities, processes, and relations
    It is a process of deterritirialization as a result of technological and political developments
        1. Are their buisness consequences of globalization as deterritorialisation
        2. Are there ethically relevant consequences
        3. How do the ethically relevant consequences arise?

    Business Consequences
        Larger markets
        Cheaper production sites
        Better access to resources
        Increased risks
        Subject to different laws

    Ethically Relevant issues
        Sweatshop
        Un-fiar trade
        Transfer of polluting industries to developing countries
        Dumping of toxic wastes
        Sale of medicines that are prohibited because of a serious side effect
        Destruction of jobs in the country of origin businesses transfering
        Cultural impact

    How do these issues arise
        Is there a common denominator
            Lax rusles in the recipient country
            Type of activities that are de-territorialized
            ...

Ethicall relevant impacts of globalization
    
Values in Tension: ethics away from home
    The problem of values across cultural boundaries (how to deal with value conflicts)
        Should our values rule our decisions even when we are operating in their society
        or should theirs?
    The Bhopal disaster in India raises the question about what obligations our companies have when operating in other countries
        Gas leak in India, considered the world's worst industrial disaster
        Over 500000 people were exposed 
        Between 8000-16000 were injured(?)
    What moral obligations do international actors have for their actions in other countries
    Do lax standards of forign governments justify our companies' neglect of safety measures
    What are moral relativism (morals based on the culture you are in) and moral absolutism (morals are the same throughout cultures) 
    Donaldson claims: Moral relativism and moral absolutism are both confused
        Ethics is not as relative as the relativists clame
        Not absolute as the absolutists supose
    Relavent
        Different moral perceptions may take priority in other societies
        Moral truths may be expressed by different concepts than we are ...
        ...
    
    Donaldson suggests three guiding principles
        To represent core human values
        To respect local traditions
        To take context into account
    Core values are those that likely would be recognised across "western" and "nonwester" cultures
    What reason may Donaldson have for the belief that there are such core values
    One Reason: similarity in human hopes and capacities, in other words, our shared humanity
    Core Values:
        Dignity: Not being treated as a mere means. Being recognised as having intrinsic value
        Basic Rights: Respect as employees, as customers, as members of nearby communities.
        Good Citizenship: Supporting essential social institutions, protecting the environment.
    Needed:
        Development of appropriate 'corporate culture' that includes -but also goes beyond- statements of values and codes of conduct

    Key Factors in corporate culture
        Clear statements
        Explicit guidelines
        SUpport the development of appropriate judgements / applications of the guidelines
    
    Exercise:
        You may want to apply his advice in relation to the business opportunities and moral risks of subcontracting in developming countries, such as Bengladesh


Bribery: What is wrong with it?
    



==========
2018-10-30
==========

Title
Last name, First name
Lastname2, firstname2
...


Questions to ask re bribery
    1.  There is something problamatic in the fact that you've pursuaded someone to do something for you that they shouldn't be doing
        Get something in a way that shouldn't be done through a dishonest transaction
    2.  Gives an advantage to the party that gives the bribe over parties that don't
        The advantage might not be to the benefit of the public/individuals
    3.  The bribe may cause the person to break the ethical responsibilities to other parties

Bribery
    What is bribery exactly? How would you define it?
    Defn
        The offering, giving, recieving, or soliciting of any item of value to influence the actions of an official or other person in charge of a public of legal duty
        Is the act of giving money, goods or other forms ..
    What is the problem with 'influencing' the behaviour of officers/managers of a company, or administrators in government?
        The question to ask it: is behaviour being alterd in an inappropriate way

    Key here is that
        power is used to divert resources to accomplish illegitimate goals of certain individuals or entities. What makes them illegitimate?
    Not being in keeling with the role that the officer has
    Pratically, at least two kinds of problems result
        1. Can harm other parties who don't have the illegitimate access
        2. Corruption of a system
    What is corruption?
    Various ways to think about it
        Abuse of power or position to acquire a personal benefit
    More generally
        to destroy, to contaminate
        to undermine the well functioning of something by weakening its structure

    Ex
        A building made with iron supports where the iron has corroded and now the building is in danger of collapsing
    What 'core' or structure is at issue regarding briberies
    What core or structure is fundamental in a business, in the relations among businesses, and between buisnesses and society?
        Perhaps trustworthiness?
        Perhaps the assumption that all parties will be fairl treated?
    WHo will be most affected by corruption
    If corruption is breaking a system in which power is wielded...

Fadiman
    Fadiman addresses himself to US Law
    In Canada we habe relatibely similar law (Osborne) and we are signatories of a number of internationally ...

    The 'ethical side': payoffs are 'universally dissaproved'
        What arguments from ethical theory may we give for this disapproval?
    Utilitarian ethics: when payoffs are given to officers, does this max happiness for the greatest number?
        Key here is to not ask whether some players would benefit but whether the alternatives would likely have better results
        So whether playing by the rules would habe better results overall
    Kantian Ethics
        Is paying off a person in power do something against ...

    He also mentions that some countries have 'rigorusly enforced statues against most forms of private payoff'
        does this add to legitimate ethical concerns or is this irrelevant?
    It adds to the price to pay by those implicated if found out
        so it is a prudential consideration that appeals to the self-interest of individuals
    Hey says that most businesses prefer to play by local rules, competing on the open market according to the quality, price, and services provided by their product
        Are their good reasons why the rest of us should be in favour of this
    The 'cultural side'...

    These traditions that may or may not lead to illegitimate payoffs
    1.  The inner circle
        Intended to create a distinction between 'those with whom they have relationships...
    2.  Future favour
        Whthin the inner circle, it is assumed that favours will be repayed at some future time
        The point of doing favours is to create meaningful links and relationships
        Fadiman says that
            NA prefer to simply do business
            ...

        According to fadiman, 'while we seek to discharge obligations they, seek to create obligations'
        Why?
        Our focus on the short term, theirs is on generating future favours

    3.  The gift exchange
        Meant to create obligation as well as to show affection
            signals the desire to begin relationships
        Discussion
        So what are appropriate responses for our businesses regarding these three traditons?
        ...
        
        How to participate in gift giving without bribing?
        Fadiman suggest that the donation strategy is better than responding to direct or indirect requests for a gift. How so?
        Fadiman seems to suffest that the donation strategy provides
            Appeasement of local expectations
            ...
        ...

Bribery: ultimately bad for business
    Artice in the business journal Forbes: "the real cost of bribery" (2013)
    Bottom line:
        Bribery seems like a bad idea in the medium and longer term, even if the short term it may seem advantageous






==========
2018-10-31
==========

Enjoying/finding purpose in work and leasure
Using leasure to improve work and vice versa
negotium = business
What is work all about
    Necessary in an industrial society


Buddhist Economics

Schumacher
    Worked for a coal board

Buddhism
    Religion and philosophy
    Life is not easy for majority of people, so how do you deal with that?
    Three ways
        Life in such a way you can bare the suffering
        Invent a scheme on how to get out of this life
        Take note that other people suffer, and take compassion with them, aleviate their suffering

How does this get into Buddhist Economics?

Similar to Aristotle
    Things are dynamic
    Seeds have potential, but little actuality
    Move from potential to actual
    Work is a way of flourishing
        Becoming what you could become
        It is present in the European system, but is buried by the need to extract resources

Work turns into labour

Review of Buddhism and ethics
    Both religion and philosophy
    Because we all share the problem that desires may dominate us and cause suffering
    ...

Intro to Buddhist Economics
    Themes
        Significance of work
        The essence of civilization
        Organization of work-production-consumption
        consequences of 'simplicity' for 'violence'
        Relation to natural Resources
        Relation between 'modern' and Buddhist Economics
    Questions
        1.  What is the point of work
        2.  What is the essence of civilization
        ...

Intro: Work
    What is the point of work?
    Signumd Freud said that to be healthy is to be able to work and love. Does this make sense? How? Why?
    Is work an invention of industrial society? Is it perhaps and invention of urban societies? Have human beings always 'worked'
    What exactly...

Work
    Significants
        'Labour is treated as cost for employers and as disutility for employees in standard economics'
            What does he mean by this sentence
        Three aspects of work form the Buddhist perspective:
            Opportunity to develop one's faculties
            Enables overcoming ego-centredness
            Generates goods and survaces for a dignified life

    Aristotle's idea of actualisation of potentials, as well as Sartre's existentialism may be relevant
    Aristotle
        Seeds for example not what they grow to be full plants
        Humans as rational animals, can realise their potential as such
        work is a focused application of capacities that may develop the further
    Sartre and Simone de Beauvior
        FOr humans existence comes before e....
        ...

The Essence of civilization
    What is 'civilization'
    How could it have an 'essence' adn if it has an essence, does this mean that civilization can aim at something?
        If so, what is that aim form the Buddhist perspective
    Schumacher claims that the aim of civilization should not be multiplication of wants but 'purification of character'
        What is meant by that? How could a character be 'impure'
        In what sense is the purification of character a good thing
    He contrasts an interest in goods with an interest in liberation
        What is meant by liberation
    He is against 'outside employment' for women
        What may be his point?
        ...

Organization of work-production-consumption
    According to the Buddhist way
        Not to minimize factors of production for maximized consumptiono
        To maximize well being with minimum consumption
        optimal patter consumption vs optimal pattern of production
    ...





==========
2018-11-02
==========

Exentialism
    Human beings are percular because we make ourselves, we have a certain programming but there is a cross-cultural programming, we can/do make ourselves because we can
    We are forced to choose all the time

Bad Faith
    Lying to yourself/others
    
The essence of civilization
    What is civilization
    How could it have an essence? And if it has an essence, does this meand that civilization can aim at something?
        If so, what is the aim from the Buddhist perspective
    Schumacher claims that the aim should not be multiplicaton of wants but purification of characters
        What is meant by that? How could a character be impure
        So in what sense is the purification of character a good thing?
    He contrasts an interest in goods with an interest in liberation
        What is meant by liberation?
    He is agains outside employment for women
        What may be his point
        What objections might we offer to his views
        How might he respond if he were living today?

Buddhism: Suffering has to do with attachments
    if you don't become attached to these things, you won't suffer

Consequences of 'simplicity' in production for 'violence' (Simplicity in lifestyle)
    What is wrong with violence? Is there a connection between violence and violating something? WHat is violated by violence? (Forcing you way into a relm that doesn't belong to you)
    Schumacher proposes that simplicity and non-violence are linked. How so?
    Self sufficiency is the best, because you don't have to push

Resource: not just what it is, but how it fits into your process

Relation to natural resources
    All sentient beings, as well as trees, are respected by the Buddhist way. Why? (Because they can suffer)
    He proposes a different treatment of renewable and non-renewable resources. Why?

Relation between 'modern' and Buddhist economics
    Is 'modern' economics equivilent to 'progress' and Buddhist economics really a kind of throwback to 'primitivism' = stagnation?
    Depends on what 'progress' is
    Schumacher: The Buddhist 'Middle Way' of development aims to ...

Progress: goal vs good goal

Questions
    1.  Approach to renewable resources. 
    2.  Reducing consumption
    3.  Employees would be more understanding
    4.  Less focused on the global, because of self sufficiency
    5.  Respecting resources
    6.  Capitalism





==========
2018-11-06
==========

Environmental Responsibility - Ethics and the workplace, and Toni Yogurts

Environmental ethics in the workplace
    Environment
        1.  Why do we care about the condition of the natural environment? Why should we care?
        2.  What might be meant by 'environmental integrity?' (What is integrity?)
                Keeping the environment functioning how it should be - for itself
        3.  What might environmental integrity, and harm to that integrity, generate ethical concern? What do the main theories of ethics have to say about this?
                We rely on the environment, and harming it harms everyone
        4.  Who is responsible for the maintenance of environmental integrity and why?
                All humans, corporations, because they are the ones contributing to the environment's harm
    Business
        1.  What is the role of business in the maintenance of environmental integrity and why?
                Try to reduce their effect on the business, pay taxes to compensate their effect on the environment (but lobbying exists)
        2.  How can environmental integrity be supported in business?
            a) how can it be supported in the design of the organisation of businesses 
                Have the environment in thought during the design of the business, have goals to reduce their effect on the environment
            b) how in the day-to-day operation of business?
        3.  How is enivronmental integrity to be balanced with the pursuit of profits and the pursuit of social responsibilities towards employees and community? Think of a concrete example
            Site C Dam

Environmental ethics in the workplace
    The main theories of ethics: up to what point do they pay any attention to the natural environment?
        In general, how do responsibilities arise?
    Living being - goals inbuilt into themselves
    Theory of ethics that has the environment as a role in it
    It may be suggested that responsibilties arise
        Form relationships
        From power
        From values
        Other sources?
    How would one argue in detail for any one of those clains?
    How might these responsibilities arise from the perspective of the theories of ethics introduced in this course
    How might ....

Environmental ethics in the workplace
    You can actually think through all the theories of ethics
    Concrete sources of responsibilities arising from the persoectve of the various theories of ethics:
        1.  Respect for humans because of our shared hope for autonomy
        2.  Empathy with those who may be exposed to suffering
        3.  caring becaues our relationships with others 
        4.  oru interconnectedness with the fates of other beings
        5.  respect for living beings who share our capacity for flourishing 
        6.  care for land and diverse species living on it because we are in community wth it
        7.  respect for the planet as a sor of living organism
        8.  respect for the well being of future generations






==========
2018-11-07
==========

Environmental ethics in the workplace
    Three critiques of relations to the natural environment and ecological/environmental integrity:
        1.  ethical
        2.  social
        3.  cultural
    Each type envisages our relations under a different perspective
        1.  ethical, in terms of the consequences of taking seriously one's responsibilities for actions towards others with moral standing
        2.  social, in terms of maintaining a just social fabric across society
        3.  cultural, in terms of belief and value systems that may support or undermine our environment....
    ...
    
    1) Ethical critiques based on responsibility
        moral standing, analogous to legal standing
        a) responsibilities regarding the natural environment (people care about things)
            present and fusture human generations generally are supposed to have moral standing: in these cases we spoeak of responsibilities regarding the natural environment
            environmental costs should bbe borne by those who cause them: out of fairness they should be internalized and not externalized
        b) responsibilities to the natural environment (things have their own standing)
            non-human natural beings are seen as having intrisic value of their own, not just use value: 
            their integrity should be considered for their own sake, and responsibilities are to the natural things
        Sometimes we may percieve responsibilities both regarding and to some baings
            responsibility regarding and to your neighbour's dog or cat
            the natural environmental world as a resource and as home. People deeply rooted...

    2) Social critiques: a sample of approaches for maintaining a just social fabric across society
        Ecological feminism (ecofeminism)
            oppression of women and nature have gone hand in hand, so both should be opposed
        Social Ecology
            ...
        Fair distribution of risk: the precautionary principle:
            While it is tempting to engage in new ventures of all sort, when those ventures mean new, uncertian, risks for third parties we may wonder about fairness
            "Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of ful scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason..."
        Others grounded in for example
            Human rights
            Indigenous cultures
            Creationism
            And so on

    3) Cultural critiques based in belief and balue systems that may support or undermine environmental goods culturally percieved as important, such as environmental integrity
        Shallow vs deep ecology
            deep ecology suggests to go beyond them by asking us to thing afresh the human place...

    Business ethics vs everyday ethics
        business ethics allows many types of actions that are not commonly permissible because...

    It seems that we are in a phase of de-materialization and de-industrialization as we switch to third wave service industries
    Certianly someone is producing the goods that multi-nationals sell, that banks support with loans, and that consumers buy...
    Opportunities ant linimations at the workplace
        Knowledge and position/situation create dicerse roles
        So, one may argue that in the workplace, at leas some people, have a special power to act due to roles that entail...

    Diverse roles: diverse capacities to take responsibilities
    Bottom Line: All of the individuals who make decisions that can affect the integrity of the natural environment
    Consequently the all share responsibility ...

    WHy commit oneself to safeguarding environmental integrity
    Sartre's Existentialism: humans make their essence
    Existentialist principle applied to our interactions with the natural environment
        We make both ourselves and the kind of world that we then pass on the next generations
    Questions regarding the role of environmental ethics in the workplace






==========
2018-11-09
==========

Toni Yogurts - read up on the case study
    Bottom line
        1.  there are new opportuniteis for businesses with an ecological focus
        2.  stamina and marketing expertise are necessary
        3.  a 'collective marketing strategy,' involving a network of actors besides the organisation as such can be a powerful tool...
        ...

Sexual Harassment in the times of #metoo

Questions regarding sexual harassment

Defn of Harassment
    To Harass
        to annoy persistently
        To create an unpleasent or hostile situation for someone especially by uninvited and unwelcome...

Defn of sexual harassment
    Superson argues against definitions of sexual harassment that allude to "mental states of the perpetrator and the victim"
    Two issues
        How much can we know about someone's mental state?
        Does sexual harassment only concern the individual, or a group?

    Systemic dimension
        from the say that society/institutions functions
        may affect society in a wider sense
    Present in cases which individuals are aggressed as members of groups
        racism
        religious intolerance
        Ageism, sexims, and other -isms
    How does the systemic dimension....

    Who is affected by cases of sexual harassment?
    is it only the particular individual who feels harassed?
    or are others affected
    Supposing
        How the victim feels
        what the perpetratior intended
    Shifts the proof to the victim

Superson
    Objective means that the focus is on the object rather than on the subjects who experience objects
    One consequence of objective-focused claims that the judgements about the object should be decideable by anyone who pays sufficient, understanding attention to it
    Consider temperature
        hot and cold are subjective
        but the temperature is objective
    Regarding sexual harassment
        ...

    Should be similer to racial descrimination
    says a proper defn should take into consideration group harm

    Offers reasons why the subjective approach is inadequate
        Unlikely the victim will complain
    Supersons defn
        Any behaviour caused by person A in the dominant class directed at another, B, in the subjagated class
            a) that expresses and perpetuates the attitude that B or members of Bs sex are inferior...
            ...

    Subordinates due to sexual difference
    Advantages
        Anyone can lodge a complaint
        ...

Law Society of BC
    Is it subjective?





==========
2018-11-16
==========

Bluffing: Can it be Justified in Business

Basic Questions
    3.  Game implies consent which makes it better
    5.  Uses the person as a means
    6.  Is making someone draw their own wrong conclusions worse that giving someone the wrong conclusion

Carr
    One defn of bluffing: Making it seem that you are going to do one thing what you don't have that intention really
    Carr's ethics of business treats bluffing as acceptable
    Why does he say these actions are acceptable?
        Advertising in misleading ways
        Built in obsolescense
        Interfering with political process to procure facourable laws
        ...
    ...

    Carr's Advice
        Make sure you do not lose self respect or become emotionally disturbed by the ethics of business
    
    Specific activities that are justified by the 'ethics of business' according to Carr:
        1.  Deceptive packaging
        2.  Cars build with know defects
        3.  Utility companies eluding regulation sso that they can obtain high fees from users
        4.  Inaccurate insurance calculations
        5.  ...

    Carr's view of why business people engage in bluffing
        necessary tool for obtaining more than...
        ...
    ...

    Relies on an analogy
        Business is like a poker game
        Whatever is allowed in such games should be allowed in business
        It is convenient to bluff both in poker and business
        ---------------------------------------------------------------
        Bluffing should be allowed in business
    In what ways may the analogy be misplaced
    ...

Allhoff
    Though critical of Carr, he make a case for the moral permissibility of bluffing
    Critique of Carr
        What determines the rules of games are conventions
        Appeal to law is also an appeal to a certain type of convention: it is what we have conveniend on
        ...
    ...

    He argues that neither the law nore other conventions have a role in morally legitimating actions. Why not?
    Reference to the law ans the other conventions of our society are references to 'what is'
    What is the case han no direct bearing on what ought to be (David Hume's is-ought distinction)
    Could mere consent -- that is, by participating in business legitimise bluffing?
        Just because you consent to one thing, does not mean you consent to a different thing

    What is needed
        1.  A moral argument for the legitimacy of bluffing in the games in which it is practiced
        2.  An argument for extending this legitimacy to bluffing in business
    Allhoff's solution: role-differentiated morality
        In certain actions respectively are
            a) permissible
            b) impermissible
            c) obligatory
        which would not be so normally
    Cirmumstances in which bluffing is impermissible because the moral stance ...
    ...

    When is it permissible
        In games. But why?
            Its for fun, endorsed, and voluntary
    Endorsement means that participants explicity agree to the terms, in contrast to consent
    ...

Questions that we may want to ask
    Are the conditions satisfied in all business scenarios?
    What if some participants in transactions cannot, or prefer not to endorse such practices
    In which kinds of cases would bluffing be acceptable by Allhoff's argument? What do all those cases share?





==========
2018-11-20
==========

Social Enterprise

What is the Economy (Study of the laws of the home)
    Stuff measured by GDP
    An economy is the system a society has for producing, distributing, and consuming the means of livelihood (Karl Polanyi)
    Market-based exchanges are a part of it
    Think about how much of what has kept you going since you were born, and now, is not produced by market exchange
    Think about how much stuff...

What is the 'Social Economy'
    Variety of defn in literature
    Generally
        The agents are orgamizations of private citizens (excludes government)
        Objectives are social benefit (excludes profit priority_
    So a third sector after public and private parts of the economy
    Complications
        ...

    Notion of a social benefit

What is 'Social Enterprise'
    One defn
        Business with primarily social objectives, who's surplusses are reinvested for that purpose
    More emphasis in the US on doing business in order to be philanthropic, whereas UK and EU more on community orgamizing, democratic control of capital, and mutuality

The Range of Social Enterprises
    
Canada: Social Enterprise in Practice
    Long History: Co-op Movement
    Vast majority of social enterprise established through the non-profit sector

New Business forms

What about co-operative?
    International co-operative Alliance defn
        An autonomous association of persons united voluntarily to meet their common economic, social, and cultrual needs and aspirations through a jointly-owend and democratically ...

Are cooperatives social enterprises
    Often assumed to be
    some are, some aren't

Which one is a Co-op
    VanCity - yes
    Ocean Spray - yes
    Island Farms Dairy? - yes
    MEC - yes
    Adrenalin Motorcycle Shop
    Best Western Hotels? - Sort of in marketing
    Home Hardware - yes
    Costco - no
    Westjet - no

Consumer Co-ops
    Buy products in bulk and pass on the savings to their members. The members own the store and make decisions about what products to sell, where products come from and other key issues

Worker co-ops
    The member-owners operate their business together and make dicisions about all important issues including wages, production methods, and finances.

Producer or Marketing co-ops
    Allows members to share packaging and marketing...

Credit Unions
    Provides a full range of financial services to members, who are also owners and elect the Board of Directors (one membership, one vote)

Social co-ops
    People orgamize co-operatively to supply social services such as health care, elder and child care, and education

Multi-stakeholder co-ops

What's all this got to do with ethics?
    One thing: Social enterprises and co-ops challenge the Friedman assumption about the sole purpose of business; which is...?
    Also: Cooperatives are under the control of owners who may be thir users or beneficiaries, so can act in the interests of those users and beneficiaries!


Locke, Smith, Marx: the foundations of property, the increase in national wealth and the value of work

Locke, Smith, Marx
    Three concerns
        Locke: defence of the legitimacy of (private property)
            How to justify the 17th century appropriation by rising middle class and lower aristocracy of resources (land) from areas held in common
        Smith: explanation of the 'wealth of nations'
            Recognition that small-scale economic activity is a way to increase the general wealth of society
        Marx: analysis of the value of work under capitalism
            for the marjority, work in capitalist conditions does not lead to property (contrary to Locke's claim), and even alienates people from themselves
    By the way: 'man' in this text is a mistranslation of Mensch, which means 'human being'





==========
2018-11-21
==========

Property
    1.  The (nearly) exclusive use of something

Before Property
    Right of exclusive use of certain items or areas by certain individuals, is not universal either throughout history or cultures
    Property only becomes an important organising principle with dependence on agriculture and permanent sites
    Common areas managed communally still exits

John Locke
    Member of the rising middle class
        father was a lawyer, and he himself accumulated agricultural land throughout his life, which was worked for him by tenants
    Locke seeks a solution between the orns of a dilemma. An argument against both contending alternatives (both biblical) for land:
        owned by a particular set of descendants of the first owner
        common to all humans
    
    In other words
        No one can obtain property because all land in 'crown land' and commoners may only 'usufruct' on it
        To withdraw something from what we own jointly to make it private property, requires consensus of all
    ...

Locke
    Locke needs to argue for legitimate private ownership, no matter whether
        a) land is believed to beling to a single authority
        b) owned by all people together
    How?
    Through labour. Example: collecting acorns and apples
        Originally, property is the result of applying one's labour to some part of the common, natural world. Why does that give you property in it?
    Because he assumes that one's ....
        ....

    Assumptions
        1.  Separation of items from the commons is necessary to survive
        2.  one's labour 'naturally' os one's property because one's body is
        3.  so, through labour one turns something common, like a tree, a forest or of fish, into property
    We may ask questions about each of those suppositions
        Re 1 and 2: are these true in any society? or are they dependent on particular arrangements of societies?
        Re 2: is 'ownership' of body a natural quality? do canada geese 'own' their bodies? Do oak trees? Are humans special in this respect?
        Re 3: how can work change the status of something 'that grew by itself' from commons into property just because we collect it? Is this not magical thinking?
    How much may one take? Do others have to be taken into account in one's appropriation of the commons? Why?
        God made human beings, and everyone should have equal access
        You shouldn't take so that other's don't have access

    1.  Lockean proviso (Section 31): appropriation is without consequence as long as 'there was still enough, and as good left'
    2.  Spoilage proviso (Section 31 and 38): one may only take as much as one may be able to use before it spoils?
    
    Because the private use of something that was available to all limits the access of other. So, what ethical ...

    Can the spoilage proviso...

    Problem 'solved' through the invention of money?
    By peole 'having, by tacit and voluntary consent, found out how a man may fairly posess more land than he himself can use the product of'
        Is he right that using money is to give tacit and voluntary consent?
        What makes it voluntary if we have no option because we need to pay taxes in money?

Locke and land in approx 1690
    What about the Lockean Proviso that one should leave 'still enough, and as good' for othes?
    What if the land runs out because all of it has been apporpriated?
        Locke: there still is plenty of land as good: 'let him plant some inland vacant places of America' (Section 36) Why there?
    Because Native Americans don't enclose and don't improve land...
    ...

    Locke convieniently ignores the 50-100 million people who made the use of the land in NA prior to 'contact with Europeans
    For 12000 years or longer the people in the americas use land in a different way than the Europeans were used to in 1690:
        They may use different patches agricultural land in different years - helps maintain fertility
        They move ...

Questions
    1.  Does Locke's way of justifying private property make sense?
            Do I own my body? Is ownership an 'natural' matter
            Or is ownership of anything a conventional matter, resulting from aagreement in society - because it is conbenient or useful to all of us at some point in time
    2.  Might there be reasons to continue with some kinds of collective property, to be held 'in common' after all?
    3.  If with population growth we are sure to reach a point at which 'as good and as much' cannot ...
    ...

Adam Smith
    The dominant economic theory of Smith's time:
        Mercantilism:
            The wealth of a nation was to be assessed by the amount of money and goods within it's borders at any given time: "stock"
    Mercantilists sought
    Should talk about it in terms of labour

    Main points of The Wealth of Nations (1776)
        1.  An alternative to mercantilism
        2.  Labour brings wealth, Smith argues. The more one labouts the more one earns
        3.  With enough money, it offers the means to make life more convenient and sometimes ..
        ...

    Smith's The nature and causes of the wealth of nations argues that national wealth is primary doe to two factors
    They are
        Division of labour
        barter/trade




